(♪♪)
>> Erica: Hey, Canada, I'm
Erica Johnson.
>> Tom: And I'm Tom Harrington.
This week we're serving up a
"Marketplace" special, a first
test of its kind.
>> Erica: We're going
undercover...like never before!
Inside some of your favourite
restaurant chains...
Revealing what they don't want
you to see.
>> When they were doing the
chicken, they brought it out,
there was a cooked mouse in
there.
>> Go, go, go.
>> Tom: An industry keeping you
in the dark..
Why don't you give people more
information?
>> Erica: Canada's biggest
restaurant inspection ever.
Find out how your favourite
chain ranks.
>> Tom: So sit tight...
We're about to lift the lid on
Canada's restaurant secrets.
(♪♪)
>> Erica: We're in downtown
Vancouver.
Heading to a restaurant stakeout
This is a marketplace staffer...
But today...
She's a server...
Undercover...
>> Sorry.
>> Erica: Rigged with a hidden
camera.
>> Ready ready ready.
Five chocolate brownies back
here.
>> Erica: To get access to a
place diners don't normally get
to go.
>> Sort through this.
>> Erica: A kitchen in chaos.
>> Quickly wipe it.
As long as it looks clean.
>> Erica: And a restaurant
nightmare.
>> What the f--- how old is
this s---.
I don't remember seeing it
today, that's for sure.
>> Erica: Canadians love
eating out.
We spend about two thousand
dollars a year per household on
those meals, but are we getting
more than what we pay for?
Have you gone out somewhere and
eaten something and thought
this is not sitting right.
>> It's just one of those
feelings, where a couple hours
later you're on the toilet.
>> I have found a hair in my
food.
>> That's not very appetizing.
What stories have you heard?
>> If you dropped something, you
would almost sometimes put it
back in the deep fryer to kind
of clean it off and then put it
back in.
>> When they doing the chicken,
they're brought it out and there
was a cooked mouse in there.
>> Like, this is weird.
Like, apple crisp is not
supposed to be chewy.
She pulls it out, it's a
Band-aid.
OHH!
She was trying to chew through
the Band-aid.
>> We just went out for lunch.
>> Erica: So without too much
detail, can you describe...
You know you ate, you get back
to your hotel...
>> You spend a lot of time in
the toilet.
And violently so it's not very
nice.
>> Tom: Meet award winning
restaurant owner Roger Mooking.
He's a stickler in the kitchen.
>> You know, you want every
customer to be satisfied, leave
really happy.
Feel full like they've have a
great time, and you don't want
anybody going home feeling sick,
that's a chef's worst
nightmare.hef's worst
>> Tom: Celebrity chef Roger
Mooking's a judge and host on
Popular cooking shows.
>> Tom and Erica can you make
this?
>> Tom: Woah, seems we're in
for a challenge.
>> Erica: Hey Chef Mooking...
>> Hello, Erica and Tom.
>> Tom: Hi Chef, Welcome to our
test kitchen.
But not critiqueing our cooking,
he's making sure we're keeping
up with safe food handling
practices.
To help us do that, he's
setting up a cooking
competition.
>> Tom and Erica, your challenge
today is to make me an
unforgettable meal.
Make me proud.
And you have to do it before
time runs out.
Have you ever worked in a
kitchen as a cook before?
>> Erica: I'm really wishing I
had.
>> Tom: At home.
>> Please open your baskets.
(♪♪)
>> Now these are some of the
ingredients you're going to use
to make my special recipes.
Moosho pancakes and cashew
spiced chicken.
>> Tom: Nice.
>> You have 60 minutes.
Your time starts now.
(♪♪)
No one has washed their hands
yet.ne has washed their hands
I'm watching.
Don't forget I'm watching you
so please be mindful of how
you're handling your foods.
>> Tom: You're right Chef but
you know what?
I think it's safe to say Erica
and I are going to make a few
mistakes in here.
>> Erica: Maybe more than a few
Tom, but you know, when we're
eating out we expect the places
that make our food to get it
right.
>> Tom: Absolutely right about
that.
The reality is, almost two
million of us get sick from
eating out every year.
(♪♪)
>> Erica: So who's out there,
trying to protect us?
People like Jim Chan, a Toronto
health inspector for almost
40 years.
Have you ever inspected this
place?
>> This place, yes, last time I
was here, it was pretty good.
>> Erica: Jim's retired now but
we've recruited him for our
kitchen patrol.
>> Always look for hidden area.
>> Erica: We want the inside
scoop on a good restaurant
inspection.
>> If we look at just the
corner, itís nice and clean.
>> Erica: He doesn't miss
a spot.
How about the cutting board?
>> The cutting board.
Okay, now this one, I would
probably make a recommendation
for them to get a new one.
>> Erica: But that's small
potatoes.
Chan's got an eagle eye on
everything.
From thorough handwashing...
To thermometers...
Properly stored garbage...
And safely handled food....
Any slip-ups?
Inspectors like him'll write
them up In a report as major
violations, health hazards that
could make make you sick.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: And those inspection
reports are key to our
restaurant checkup.
In the biggest investigation
of its kind, Marketplace has
analyzed almost 5000 of them.
A year's worth.
Five cities, Ottawa,Toronto,
Regina, Calgary and Vancouver 13
popular coffee shops, fast food
joints and family dining chains
in the country.
A statistician crunched the
numbers so we could rank your
favourite places to eat.
From the least number of health
violations, to the most.
Hygiene issues, dirty food
handling, unsanitary kitchen
conditions.
You might be stunned to learn
some of the unsavoury secrets
behind the food you're served.
But we'll show you how to
protect yourself.
>> Erica: Jim chan spent decades
protecting us from food that
bites back.
He's been at centre stage for
some major food poisoning
outbreaks.
>> We continue to monitor the
closure.
>> Erica: He helped solve last
year's cronut burger mystery
at the Canadian National
Exhibition where more than two
hundred people got sick.
But that's not all.
What's one of the worst things
you ever saw during your time?
>> I think one of the worst one
I ever had to do was at the food
court that the health inspector
shut down, because of a
heavy rat infestation.
So when we actually do the
inspection at that time, we
actually saw live rats running
around.
>> Erica: Live rats?
>> Yeah, that's right.
For the health inspector to walk
in and see live rats running
around, wow, that's an eye
opener.
(♪♪)
>> Erica: We've got another
eye opener for you,
the first restaurant secret
revealed in our check up.
Out of almost 5,000 inspection
reports, about one in four have
at least one major violation.
Almost a quarter of them had at
least one major violation if not
more.
What do you think of that?
>> There's a lot of
documentation on hand washing.
To me, that's crucial, because,
you know what we do with our
hands.
Imagine all the bacteria, the
germs or even pathogens can go
onto the surface of the food
preparation area, or can go
directly onto your food.
(♪♪)
>> Erica: That's right, our
restaurant check up reveals
handwashing is one of the most
common problems.
We want to see for ourselves.
So we're back at our undercover
stakeout at a Vancouver Moxies.
It's a popular Canadian chain.
During her shifts, our
marketplace server hardly sees
anyone wash their hands.
Hand into the bowl of fries.
Our server's told those are for
customers.
Hmmm, wiping the plate?
Makes you hope her hand is
clean.
(Coughing)
>> Erica: No hand washing here!
Seems there's more talk about
high heels than food safety.
>> Are your heels comfortable?
>> Yeah.
>> Erica: Yet almost everyone
here handles food.
>> If I handle food out there,
my hands should be clean.
>> Erica: In fact, this location
has lots of bad inspection
Reports.
Our undercover server tries
washing her hands but...
>> The water stays cold.
>> Erica: We discover inspectors
have told Moxies to fix the hot
Water...
Twice.
They finally did.
But now?
There's no hot water again.
What's the message in that
restaurant where employees talk
to you about her hair, her
makeup, how high her heels are,
but is never told to wash her
hands.
>> The first thing I would
always say to people is that
before you open your restaurant,
make sure your staff are
properly trained.
>> Erica: Some restaurant chains
have rigorous training courses,
but good hygiene habits often
come down to how specific
outlets are managed.
At this Toronto subway, this
server sneezes, takes cash, then
puts on gloves.
>> Yeah, that's where she
sneezed.
She used her hand to catch the
sneeze.
Lots of people think glove,
there's, wow, this is great,
protecting my hand, but in
between, I didn't see any hand
Washing.
Imagine that she took out some
clean gloves with dirty hands.
And then soils the surface while
putting it on, and then she
actually was making a sandwich
for you.
>> Erica: It's all over the
glove.
>> Yeah.
That's right.
>> Erica: Proper hand washing
would mean clean hands and clean
gloves and a sneeze-free
sandwich.
Speaking of sneezing, an
American study of restaurants,
estimates 60% of employees show
up to work sick.
At this Toronto Wendy's watch
how a food server picks her
nails, then places food in a
bag.
Not good.
But at another Wendy's...
>> See that hanging there,
STOP, wash your hands.
>> Erica: We spot a sign
reminding staff to wash
their hands.
So a manager has been talking to
employees in there about what's
important for food safety?
>> As long as the manager
enforces it on a regular basis,
staff will do it.
It will become a habit.
>> Erica: Just what Chan likes
to see...
>> I give them a pretty good
rating on this one.
>> Tom: How does your restaurant
rate?
(To make a mooshoo pancake you
gotta break some eggs).
Find out which chains kick off
our countdown with the least
violations.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: And after the break,
you're about to see what happens
when things really go wrong.
>> It felt like razor blades in
my stomach.
>> Tom: How can you dine safe?
Learn five ways at
cbc.ca/marketplace.
(♪♪)
>> Tom and Erica 15 minutes
have passed.
You have 45 minutes remaining.
I can tell you have a little
more experience perhaps than
Erica just by the way you
manhandle the wisk.
>> Tom: Thank you so much
Chef, thank you.
>> Erica: Wow.
Weíre cooking up a storm with
celebrity chef Roger Mooking.
But he's not testing our
culinary skills .
>> See this is what happens.
Everybody gets trapped in the
cycle of cooking but unless we
want to serve a side of
botulism, we have to wash our
hands.
>> Tom: Okay, Chef, you're
right.
It's a crash course on kitchen
hygiene 101.
>> You know in a professional
kitchen, your beautiful locks
although coiffed wonderfully for
television would pose a little
bit of an issue, you realize
that.
>> Erica: I do realize that.
If you ever hire me in one of
your kitchens, Iíll put a hair
net on.
Deal.
>> Deal.
>> Tom: Man, It's a good thing
we're not in the biz!
But we have sifted through
almost 5,000 restaurant
inspection reports, from 13
popular chains in 5 cities.
And ranked them from fewest
major violations to most.
So let's start our countdown.
For the fewest violations, it's
a close call between Starbucks
and KFC!
Our restaurant check-up reveals
(drum roll)
>> Tom: Starbucks with 11
violations per 100 inspections.
So maybe the caffeine's not the
only jolt you're getting.
Next on the list for
violations?
KFC Known for its herbs and
spices...it has 13 violations.
So what other restaurants and
coffee shops are serving up more
than you ordered?
We're just setting the
table...more of our list later.
>> Erica: Back in Vancouver at
Moxie's.
>> Welcome to Moxie's West
Georgia.
>> Erica: Our Undercover server
gets a tour.
>> So, all the way back here is
the staff bathroom.
It's pretty gross.
And, like, the ceiling caved in
a while ago.
>> Erica: A staff bathroom
that's cluttered?
In inspection land, that's a no
no.
Our server's shown the tricks
of the trade.
>> You're always supposed to
use a tray.
A lot of servers don't but it
looks better, it looks cleaner.
>> Erica: Just watch these
hygiene habits.
A chef scratches his back -- no
handwashing.
This server touches her hair,
then the glasses!
Might not seem a big deal, but a
sure way to spread germs.
>> Tom: So what's the worst
that could happen?
Well, I'm on the way to North
Bay, Ontario, to show you.
Cause when things went wrong
here, they went horribly wrong.
It happened at this
Harvey's/Swiss Chalet.
They share the same kitchen.
And back in 2008, more than 200
people got sick after eating
here.
>> The restaurant has been
closed for nearly two weeks.
Health officials say they know
the ecoli came from inside.
But they still donít know the
source.
>> Tom: For the first time,
we're bringing together some of
the victims.
>> I ordered my usual
cheeseburger, everything on it,
with fries and a root beer.
>> Yeah, actually Harvey's was
my favourite too.
Like that's where do you want to
go?
Harvey's.
Yeah, not anymore.
They do make a great burger.
>> Tom: They share stories of a
favourite meal, gone bad.
>> I ate there twice that week.
And it was maybe the day after
the second day that I got
severely sick.
>> Tom: How was the pain?
>> It was pretty, pretty intense
and pretty scary.
>> The worst part about it, I
feel, was just not knowing what
it was.
You know, you're bleeding and
you're feeling absolutely
horrible.
But in that time, you're lying
in bed not understanding what
the issue is with you, your mind
runs away with you and you start
To feel, like, what could this
be?
>> Tom: Most ended up in
hospital some with the same
strain of e-coli that killed
seven people in the Walkerton
water crisis.
Did any of you fear you would
die?
>> I thought I was.
I was so scared that I didn't
know what was going to happen.
And because of my age, I thought
maybe it was going to affect me
first.
And, yeah, because some other
people they were younger, and I
thought well, they're bouncing
back sooner.
Like, they're leaving before I
am.
And some of them are coming in
and the next day they're gone
and I'm still there.
That fear is there.
>> The numbers keep climbing.
>> Tom: The cause of the e-coli
was never determined.
A dirty onion dicer was one
theory.
An infected employee, another.
Or perhaps an outside source.
How has this experience affected
your trust of eating out,
restaurants, fast-food, that
sort of thing?
>> It's made me really gun-shy
now.
Like, I'm really more sensitive
to it.
>> You have no choice but to
trust the people who have
prepared this for you.
Like, everything can look
fantastic, but, a couple days
later you might see a couple of
very alarming symptoms.
>> We all went through the same
level of pain and I thought I
was crazy for feeling that much
pain but we all went through it.
>> I felt safe going to
restaurants, and I swore then
because I was in such pain that
I would never eat out ever
again.
>> Tom: Daniel gaugen is part of
a class action lawsuit against
The restaurant.
>> The thing is, I never got an
apology from them right?
And that's probably what made
me angry.
>> Tom: We're pulling up near
The Harvey's.
When you see it, what goes
through your mind.
>> just to go near it, and being
in front of it and everything,
it's...
It brings back the memories, I
guess.
>> Tom: Have you been back here
since?
>> No, I haven't.
>> Tom: It's taken almost six
years, but Daniel and others
just reached a settlement.
>> Hurry up.
Time's running out.
Just like a real restaurant, it
is a pressure cooker.
>> Erica: Back in our test
kitchen, tom and i are racing
against the clock.
>> Erica please be mindful,
Keep your station as clean as
possible.
>> Erica: All right, I will try.
>> Smelling good.
>> Erica: It might, but
Chef Mooking is more concerned
about cross contamination.
okay.
I've got a cutting board Chef
Mooking.
>> You've got a cutting board
and a clean knife.
>> Erica: And I do not have a
clean knife.
>> Get me a clean knife.
Let's help her out here a
little bit, tidy up.
>> Erica: He's making sure
we're not messing up.
>> Just get a little kinda color
going on it.
And get spices working into the
chicken.
>> Tom: Okay.
>> Beautiful, beautiful Erica.
You changed the cutting board.
Very important.
Phew.
>> Tom: You can eat off the
floors in her house!
>> Yeah?
>> Tom: Yeah, I've seen them
doing it.
>>Erica: I wouldn't go that far.
>> Iíll watch you do it!
Time is ticking!!
>> Erica: Kitchen staff are also
rushing at this Vancouver
Moxie's and our undercover
server spies something curious.
>> What the f---, I wonder how
old this s--- is.
>> Erica: This guy turfs food
scraps left behind...who knows
when.
>> I don't remember seeing it
today, that's for sure.
>> Erica: It's the same shelf
where serving trays are stored.
At the restaurant's bar, is
this the makings of cross
contamination?
We ask retired health inspector
Jim Chan for his take.
>> First thing you see is that
the ice scoop is actually in the
ice, with the handle in there
too, so that's cross
contamination.
>> Erica: What's all this going
through?
>> Again, you see all kinds of
like those are like hoses or
tubes that go into the juice
machine or the soft drink.
Again, they should not be in
touching the ice, because in
that's how cross contamination
can occur.
>> Erica: The germs on the scoop
can get in the ice.
Meant for your drink.
Same goes for the orange juice
carton.
>> They shouldn't be sitting in
the ice where being used for
food and drinks.
>> Erica: The violations are
adding up.
Watch how this guy cleans his
hands with a rag.
>> like, I see on the video that
he used it to wipe a dirty
surface, then he used it to wipe
his hand.
I didn't see any handwashing
after that and to me, you
actually using a dirty cloth to
dirty a clean counter.
So again, that's a crucial
infraction, and that's how
bacteria can spread from one
surface to another.
>> Erica: In our checkup, family
dining restaurants fare the
worst when it comes to
cross-contamination.
But things aren't squeaky clean
For fast food either.
At this Toronto subway, an
employee wipes down kitchen
equipment, then a cutting board.
>> So you have a dirty cloth and
now you're contaminating the
food contact area.
So, again, could cause
contamination to the meat, to
the garnish and everything they
store at that counter.
>> Tom: And that's a major
violation.
We're counting those down at
your favourite places to eat or
grab a coffee.
So far starbucks has the fewest.
Kfc is second.
Next on the menu, A&w with 17
major violations per 100
inspections.
Subway loads up with 18.
Some of its calgary locations
busted for using dirty kitchen
cloths.
Pizza hut delivers 20.
And Tim Horton's rolls up 21
per 100 inspections.
Many major violations for lack
of handwashing supplies.
When we come back, an insider
dishes the dirt.
>> Erica: Did you have to
clean some bathrooms?
>> Oh, yeah, all the time
>> Erica: And also serve
customers?
>> Oh yeah.
>> Erica: Would you have time or
be told to wash your hands well
in between?
>> I would hope I did that but I
can't guarantee that every time
I did.
>> Erica: And our countdown
continues as we reveal more of
Canada's restaurant secrets.
>> Tom: Now its your turn to
spot the violation.
Rate your favorite restaurant
at cbc.ca/marketplace.
(♪♪)
>> Smelling pretty good in
here, Tom is slightly ahead of
the game.
He's starting to consider his
mooshoo pancakes.
We'll see how that really
goes.
>> Tom: We're in our test
kitchen with award winning
restaurateur and celebrity chef
roger mooking.
It just adds to the whole
experience.
While we kick up a storm, he's
making sure we handling food
safely.
>> So how do you know when the
chicken is safe to feed the
public.
>> Tom: I'm thinking when its
no longer pink and the juices
are clear.
>> You should bring it up to 74
degrees celsius.
>> Tom: How would I know if
it's that temperature.
>> Well, there's a thermostat
and it should reach that for 15
seconds at least.
You've been boiling it for quite
a long time like this, you will
be safe.
>> Tom: Okay.
When dining out, proper food
temperature is critical to keep
us from getting sick.
(♪♪)
>> Erica: How cold is this?
>> A little bit below 4
degrees so pretty good.
>> Erica: Retired health
inspector Jim Chan says
thermometers are key too.
No old cooking techniques
allowed.
>> You don't really want to use
your finger to say it's cooked.
>> Erica: Once cooked, foods
gotta stay at least 60 degrees
until served and can't sitrees
around any longer than an hour,
max.
And cold food?
No more than four degrees,
Add improper hand washing into
the mix and...
>> Within hours, you may have an
outbreak.
>> Erica: In our restaurant
checkup, we sift through almost
5000 inspection reports and
Discover....
Family dining and fast food
chains are neck and neck for
lots of food temperature
violations.
(♪♪)
>> Erica: So, we buy lunch to
check out those temps.
First up, to test cold, egg
salad sandwiches from second
cup.
>> Thanks so much.
>> Erica: Remember, four degrees
is the target temp.
>> So the probe goes into the
middle of the egg salad,
it's showing 13.4.
That's actually the danger
zone between 5 degree to 59
degrees celsius, that's the
danger zone.
>> Erica: Next, we pick up lunch
from Mcdonaldís, the world's
largest restaurant chain.
(♪♪)
>> Erica: How cold's the milk?
>> So the reason we check, The
milk because milk is a dairy
product and so they should be
keeping it at 4 degress celcius
or below, and stopping around
10.4, 10.3.
Okay, that means the
refrigeration temperature needs
a double look.
If a health inspector was doing
a inspection in a restaurant,
they measure the refrigeration
temperature, and then measure a
cold product like this.
And if it's this degree, that
would become a crucial
infraction.
>> Erica: Not good.
How about the burgers?
Some are fine.
But from this Mcdonald's?
Remember, they should be at
least 60 degrees.
>> This one is about 35.
>> Erica: Not nearly hot enough.
>> So for 34.8 degrees celsius,
internal temperature of the
meat, it's too low.
If this burger is being kept for
longer than an hour or so, it
potentially could be risk for
food poisoning.
>> Tom: Order up!!!
The major violations are
piling up.
We're lifting the lid on
Canada's restaurant secrets.
Crunching almost 5000 inspection
reports.
Our countdown takes us to swiss
chalet.
Not quite done to perfection
with 29 major violations per 100
inspections.
Wendy is at 30.
And Mcdonald's won't be lovin'
This...
>> Your chicken combo.
>> Tom: 33 major violations per
100 inspections.
Putting it closer to the top of
our list of restaurants with the
most violations!
Now, many chains invest in their
own safe food handling programs.
But there's no set standard.
By law our undercover moxie's
Server has to take an on-line
course to serve alcohol.
We'll drink to that.
But she's a server.
What about food handlers?
For them, in some provinces,
training is optional.
>> Erica: Domenic Losito says
that needs to change.
So you used to inspect places
like this.
>> Yes, quite a lot of them.
>> Erica: He was a Vancouver
health inspector for almost
40 years.
Now he teaches food safety.
People who serve alcohol have to
have special certifications.
Do you think food handlers
should have special
certifications too?
>> Ideally they should.
I mean what the system is right
now and itís kind of a
hodgepodge across Canada, but
it's mainly train the manager,
train the owner, maybe train
down to a supervisory level and
then they have to take that
knowledge and impart it into
their staff.
And itís a bit of a hit and
miss situation.
>> Erica: Take moxies as an
example.
Remember this scene?
And she's playing with her hair
and then she touches the wine
glasses.
>> Well, again, another case of
cross contamination.
The hair does pick up lots of
bacteria.
(♪♪)
>> Erica: Management won't let
Servers put their hair back, and
no one tells them not to
touch it.
>> Tom: After the E.Coli
outbreak in Ontario, talk of
making training maditory went
nowhere.
People who got sick say
it's time to act.
Do you believe restaurants
do a good enough job in training
their staff on things like care
of food and health.
>> I've worked in a couple
kitchens, and the training,
like, that they give you is just
they sit you down with hours and
hours of videos, and just kind
of leave you on your own, "okay,
watch these and, you know, let
us know when you're done."
>> I think that's the most
inexpensive ways of training.
>> Yeah.
I think it would be better if
there was a lot more, kind of,
hands-on 101 showing you exactly
how to do it and what to do.
>> Tom: After the outbreak, this
Harvey's/Swiss chalet says it
did retrain staff.
>> I think that it kind of
helped moving forward, like,
with managers, like, taking a
closer look and saying, hey, we
don't want something like this
happening.
So, let's make sure that our
staff know exactly what they're
dealing with.
And make sure they know what
they need to do and do it.
And probably put someone in
charge of it.
(♪♪)
>> Erica: Even though management
can make a difference when it
comes to a culture of
cleanliness, some places just
don't get it.
And that takes us back to this
moxie's.
A manager tucks into the fries.
How's that for a role model?
(♪♪)
Meanwhile...
>> I just have to make a
comment.
Are the washrooms shared with
the hotel or something?
The door locks are broken,
there's no toilet paper, there's
stuff all over the floor.
>> Oh, really?
>> Okay, I'll clean it up.
>> Erica: Our uncover server
checks out the problem.
>> The handle doesn't lock.
The water is cold, eh?
Iíll throw out my garbage in
this trusty shopping bag.
Out of order.
>> Erica: I catch up with a
former server from that
moxie's...
Sarah Cooney.
So you were a host, did you have
to clean some bathrooms?
>> Oh yeah, all the time.
>> Erica: And also serve
customers?
>> Oh yeah.
>> Erica: Would you have time or
be told to wash your hands well
in between?
>> I would hope I did that, but
I can't guarantee that every
time I did.
>> Erica: And when she tried to
speak up, she says it made no
difference.
>> Because there was such a high
turnover in managers, you
couldn't really get your point
across if you saw something
going on that shouldn't beg
going on, or if there is a
problem or they needed to order
more things.
It didn't have all the tools
necessary to do our job so.
>> Erica: Like what?
>> There was this thing called
Wine Tuesdays, so it's half
price wine.
On Tuesdays.
So at the beginning of your
shift you'd horde all your wine
glasses to make sure no one else
took them.
And when those ran out we would
take them from the dirty dish
pits and wash them by hand.
>> Erica: You were washing
glasses by hand,
just in the sink?
>> Yes.
We would use soap.
Weíd try to be as hygienic as
possible but when a restaurant
is completely full and you have
a minute to get this glass of
wine and you're running around
like a chicken with your head
cut off trying to find a glass
to serve it in, you just do what
you have to do.
>> Erica: Not sterilizing
glasses in a dishwasher is a
major violation.
Did you ever raise your concerns
with anyone?
>> I did call, Moxie's has a
hotline, and I called their
hotline twice, in two periods
pretty far apart.
And I think the next week, we
got one an extra rack of wine
glasses.
I was excited because oh my
god, something happened but it
didn't fix the problem.
I mean, 25 more glasses of wine
doesn't really solve the big
issue.
(♪♪)
>> Erica: When we come back,
Find out how this restaurant
gets away with cutting corners.
>> It's just unacceptable.
>> Erica: Really, you think this
Place should be closed?
>> Yup.
>> Erica: And why it doesn't
have to be that way.
>> Tom: Do you have a restaurant
secret?
Join the conversation now on
facebook and on twitter.
(♪♪)
>> Time is running out.
Very, very quickly.
>> Tom: Thank you, chef.
>> Erica: Celebrity Chef Roger
Mooking is cracking the whip.
>>Please don't let me down, you
really have to start thinking
about plating your dishes.
>> Erica: He's making sure we're
handling food safely when
cooking in our test kitchen.
>> 10 minutes ladies and
gentlemen.
There are zero moo shu pancakes.
>> Erica: Oh my gosh we have to
make the pancakes.
This is crazy!
>> I don't know what this is.
But it's kind of soppy, on an
area where we shouldn't be an
doing cooking you know, and it's
kind of a problem.
(♪♪)
>> Erica: In our restaurant
check-up of almost 5000
inspection reports,
we've noticed a troubling
pattern of repeat violations.
In Calgary, major health
violations, inspection after
inspection.
Take this subway -- cited three
times for contaminated cleaning
cloths.
And this Mcdonald's -- three
times for food temperature
issues.
A Tim Horton's was told five
times to fix its fly
infestation.
So what about that Moxie's in
Vancouver?
Its inspection reports show
violations time and time again.
Sure it can be busy, but
problems still need to be fixed.
And at another Vancouver
Moxie's, violations pile up,
too.
From improper cleaning to
dirty kitchen knives and food
temperature issues.
Seems this location isn't
cleaning up its act, either.
We show retired inspector
Domenic Losito inspection
reports from both Moxie's.
He says when restaurants don't
clean up their act, inspectors
should come down harder.
How serious do you think some of
these violations are?
>> One of the biggest reasons
for food poisoning is inadequate
cooling and refrigeration, so
that one, it's at the top ofo
the list.
>> Erica: And that one keeps
coming up,
"inadequate refrigeration."
>> Yeah.
I mean, it's in at least twice
here, so there must be other
incidents of that kind, and, I
mean, that's just not -- This
should not be tolerated and I
honestly I'm shocked that it's
taken this long and still
they're not anywhere  any
further ahead.
>> Erica: With all these repeat
violations, losito can't repeat
believe the inspector hasn't
cracked down.
Isn't it time something happens
here?
>> Well, It's well past time.
Let's see when was the first
one?
August 8th, it's almost like
weekly inspections, I would be
hauling this inspector into my
office going why are we wasting
our time and breath with this
guy and he you know, and
nothing's changing.
>> Erica: We show losito hidden
camera footage from our
undercover server, and the
inspector in those reports keeps
mentioning sticky floors, get
the garbage up off the floors.
>> Yeah, well --
>> Erica: Does it look like
they're listening?
>> At least try to get the
garbage in the garbage can, but
I think I would have walked
into this place, walked back out
and filed a closure notice right
Away.
I just-- it's just not
acceptable.
>> Erica: Really?
>> Erica: You think this place
should be closed?
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
It should, given the repeat
events.
We need to protect the public
and we're not there to keep the
business operating we're there
to protect the public, the
bottom line.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: The bottom line?
In Toronto repeat offenders are
on the run.
Thanks in part to retired health
inspector Jim Chan.
He played a key role in creating
the city's Dinesafe program.
At the front door -- a sign
customers can easily see.
>> No one wants this.
>> Tom: Based on a health
inspection, restaurants are
graded with a closed,
'conditional pass', or 'pass'.
>> Almost like telling a
customer that you're safe,
"Please come in."
>> Tom: Toronto's dinesafe
program has been around for
almost 13 years.
And Chan says it's a huge
motivator to fix problems
quickly.
>> Imagine the operator want to
post the yellow card for 48
hours, he or she would be
calling the inspector the next
day to make sure his stuff is
being corrected to get
re-inspected.
So that's part of the motivation
when you have the 3 colour
cards.
>> Erica: But in most canadian
Cities, you wouldn't have a clue
how well restaurants do.
The info's either not available
at all, or it's only posted
on-line.
Nothing to tell me how this
place does.
But do diners know that
information even exists?
Have you ever heard of this
website?
>> No I haven't.
>> Erica: That has health
inspection reports?
>> No.
I have no knowledge in that
and I worked in the serving
industry.
>> Erica: The health authority
says that you donít need these
passes at the door because you
can always go online and look up
the history of the last
inspection report.
>> No one's gonna do that.
That's crazy.
>> Erica: You're not gonna go to
the website.
>> No.
When I'm hungry and I want to
eat something Iím going to look
to see where I am and see what's
around.
>> Erica: But when we tell them
About the dinesafe program...
What do you think of a system
like this?
>> I think it's probably good
for consumers.
Not necessarily for the
restaurant.
>> You know, I'm not really in
favour of a lot more bureaucracy
but I obviously would like to
eat safely.
>> I prefer a visual sign.
>> I would prefer visual too.
>> Itís very transparent, okay.
The operator can actually see
what the customer's seeing, so
if you don't want customer to
see something bad written on the
report, make sure you correct it
before the health inspector
walks in.
>> Erica: Where's the motivation
in a city like vancouver or
calgary, for them to get better?
>> You know, like I said,
there's a choice for the health
Units to increase the level of
disclosure.
Also operators also know that
not everyone look at the website
or have time to look at the
website, so if nobody knows, why
would I improve?
(♪♪)
>> Tom: Restaurants Canada
represents the industry.
It says programs such as
dinesafe can't reflectas
accurately how complex
inspections are.
But an interview,
is not on the menu.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: No sign of a Dinesafe
program in North Bay.
If there was, Nicky and John
Hervieux might be more willing
to eat out.
Both got sick during that 2008
ecoli outbreak.
>> So don't cut too much onion
ok please?
>> It's already cut.
>> Tom: And John's bout with
food poisoning led to health
problems that forced him to stop
teaching.
You say you've lost a lot.
And you remember your life
before you sat down and had that
meal.
What was that life like compared
to what it is now?
>> It was normal, now it's not.
When you were sick I was very
stressed, I was sad.
I was scared that you were
dying.
That you were going to die,
that by summertime I wouldn't
have any husband and well --
>> Tom: He made it.
>> Yeah, so far we're still
together, almost 30 years.
>> Go, go, go, go, go.
>> Tom: When we come back,
chasing down some answers.
Why don't you give people more
information about their clean
restaurants?
>> Erica: And revealing the
number one offender in our
restaurant countdown.
>> Tom: Get the dish on your
restaurant at
cbc.ca/marketplace.
(♪♪)
>> Erica: We've been checking
out some of your favourite
restaurants, fast food spots and
coffee shops, using almost 5000
inspection reports from five
different cities, crunching the
numbers and ranking them.
>> Tom: Well now it's time for
the final countdown.
But first, let's refresh your
memory.
(♪♪)
Starbucks has the fewest
major violations per 100
inspections.
>> One piece of chicken, $1.99.
>> Erica: K.F.C.
comes next.
Followed by A&W, Subway, Pizza
Hut and Tim Hortons.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: With more violations, We
have Swiss Chalet, Wendy's, and
McDonald's.
>> I got 20 nuggets, filet o
fish, quarter pounder 2 large
fries.
>> Erica: Boston pizza,
Canada's largest casual
restaurant, comes in at 36 major
violations per 100 inspections.
And The Keg's on par.
>> Tom: We're down to the final
two in our countdown.
In second place, it's Second
Cup.
>> Just a small regular coffee
>> Tom: With 40 major violations
per 100 inspections.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: And that brings us to
the number one offender on our
list.
>> Ready,ready, ready!
Five chocolate brownies up here.
>> Erica: You guessed it.
>> Welcome to Moxie's West
Georgia.
>> Erica: Moxies!
Almost half of the inspections
we looked at have at least one
major violation.
Its locations in Regina,
Toronto, and Ottawa do okay.
But repeat violations in Calgary
and Vancouver drag down the
chain's overall ranking.
We ask moxie's head office for
an interview -- several times.
They have no appetite to speak
with us.
>> Tom: We're still hungry for
answers though.
So I'm on the way to the head
office of the Canadian
Restaurant and food services
association.
Now known as Restaurants
Canada.
It represents the industry.
We want to share the results of
our countdown.
We also want to know why the
association is against posting
Easy to see inspection results.
We ask for an on-camera
interview, multiple times.
Every time, the answer is no.
>> Here we go.
>> Tom: So we catch up with
restaurants Canada president
Garth Whyte as he comes to work.
>> Go, go, go, go, go.
>> Tom: Tom Harrington from
marketplace.
Why don't you give people more
information about their clean
restaurants.
Why donít you let people know?
why do you make it so hard?
(♪♪)
>> Tom: The head of the
association serves up silence.
As for restaurants Canada, we've
got our own grading system for
them.
Well, I think weíll have to give
Mr. Whyte and the CRFA, a fail
Enforcement action taken by
order of "marketplace."
If you dine out here are some
tips.
Washrooms can be a sign of a
restaurant's cleanliness,
check them out.
See something you don't like
in the way your food's being
handled?
Speak to the manager -- call
your local public health.
And check out our website.
We've got plenty more safe
dining tips there.
(♪♪)
>> Less than a minute, plate
your food!
5, 4, 3, 2, 1.
Hands off.
Time is up.
Let's see how it goes.
>> Tom: Back in our test
kitchen, will Erica and I get a
passing grade from Chef Mooking?
>> Erica: Chef Mooking, I
present to you cashew spiced
chiken, and moo shu pancakes.
Singular, I could only make one.
(Laughter)
>> Tom: And Chef, ditto.
Cashew spiced chicken, and moo
shu pancakes.
Two!
Just thought I'd add that, two.
>> Okay, enough chitchat, time
to taste.
>> Erica: I'm a bit nervous.
>> Tom: Looks good.
>> Now this pancake, check this
out.
She made it a little on the
thick side, so you can see that
itís actually raw here in the
centre.
That's not a good thing.
>> Erica: It is not.
Normally I would not serve that
pancake.
>> Tom: This one is a little
darker, and the arugula I just
laid as more of a decoration.
>> Unfortunately, both of your
dishes, Tom, yours especially,
is under-seasoned.
>> Tom: I think that's fair.
>> But the upside is..!
>> Erica: Taste isn't
everything.
The celebrity chef gives us some
good marks for kitchen
cleanliness.
>> Hard earned!
>>You're not kidding.
>>Toast!
We do have food, and for that I
think we should be blessed and
fortunate.
Congratulations.
>>Tom: Thank you Chef Mooking.
You made it in the time allowed.
>> Erica: Thank you for your
guidance.
And let's toast to the end of
our season.
>> Tom: Indeed.
>> Erica: Weíll be working on
stories over the summer.
So email us your ideas!
>> Tom: And stay connected with
us on Twitter and Facebook.
Bon Appetite!
(♪♪)
>> Erica: Not bad.
>> Tom: Now, how the hell does
this work?
What the hell is this?
Do I do this?
Oh, yeah, I guess that's how I
do it.
>> I hope she reads the whole
recipe quickly before she
starts, because she has runned
the risk of burning the spices.
>> Erica: Im sorry, what was
that?
>> Nothing, nothing at all.
(Laughter)
>> So Canadian of them to share
like that.
>> Tom: Wait until knives come
out.
>> Garlic, garlic.
>> Erica: My garlic is chopped,
I pre-chopped it.
Oh, psyched!
>> Hurry up time is running out.
>> Tom: I heard ya.
>> Do you know how that cashew
chicken tastes?
>> Tom: No freaking idea.
At this point I just hope it
doesn't kill ya.
>> Hurry up time is running out!
>> Tom: Oh, put a sock on it,
Chef.
(♪♪)